Core AWS Concepts
What is AWS Cloud?
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is a cloud computing platform providing on-demand infrastructure, platform, and software services via the internet.

What is IAAS, PAAS, SAAS?

IaaS: Infrastructure as a Service (e.g., EC2)

PaaS: Platform as a Service (e.g., Elastic Beanstalk)

SaaS: Software as a Service (e.g., Gmail, Salesforce)

EC2 and Compute
While creating new EC2 instance, need to execute some scripts, called as boot strapping? How you will do?
Use User Data field in EC2 instance creation to run shell scripts or cloud-init directives.

What is User Data in AWS?
It's a script provided during EC2 launch that runs automatically at the first boot of the instance.

What is AMI?
Amazon Machine Image – a pre-configured template containing OS and software to launch EC2 instances.

What is Secret key and access key?
Credentials used by AWS SDK/CLI to programmatically access AWS resources.

What is the use of Security Group?
Acts as a virtual firewall for EC2 instances to control inbound/outbound traffic.

What are the different services you are using in AWS?
EC2, S3, RDS, IAM, VPC, Lambda, CloudWatch, SNS, SQS, etc.

What exactly EC2 does in AWS?
Provides resizable compute capacity (virtual servers) in the cloud.

Have you ever worked on AWS CLI?
Yes, for tasks like EC2 management, S3 uploads, and automations via shell scripts.

Scalability & Storage
Difference Between Scalability and Elasticity?

Scalability: Increasing resources to meet demand over time.

Elasticity: Automatic resource adjustment in real-time based on demand.

What is EBS?
Elastic Block Store – durable, block-level storage for EC2.

Can we mount 1 EBS to multiple EC2 instances?
No (except for EBS Multi-Attach with io1/io2 volumes and certain OS setups).

What is Volume and Snapshot in EBS?

Volume: A virtual hard drive.

Snapshot: Backup of the EBS volume (stored in S3 internally).

Can we attach EBS to EC2 in different AZs?
No, EBS volumes are AZ-specific.

What is EFS?
Elastic File System – shared file storage for Linux EC2, mountable across AZs.

Purpose and use of S3?
Object storage for any amount of data, ideal for backups, media, logs, etc.

File size limit in S3?
Single object: 5 TB, PUT upload limit: 5 GB, use multipart upload for larger files.

Networking & Routing
What is Route53?
AWS DNS web service – handles domain registration, routing, and health checks.

Difference between private and public subnet?

Public: Has route to internet via Internet Gateway.

Private: No direct internet access.

How to access INTERNET on private subnet?
Use a NAT Gateway or NAT Instance in public subnet.

What is NAT instance/NAT Gateway?
Allows instances in private subnet to access the internet securely.

Components of VPC?
Subnet, Route Table, Internet Gateway, NAT Gateway, NACL, Security Groups, VPC Peering, etc.

Storage Variants & Lifecycle
Types of storage in AWS?

S3 (object)

EBS (block)

EFS (file)

FSx

Glacier (archival)

Difference between S3 & Glacier?

S3: Fast access, frequently accessed data.

Glacier: Long-term archiving, slower access.

S3 Storage Classes?
Standard, IA, One Zone-IA, Intelligent-Tiering, Glacier, Glacier Deep Archive.

What are Glacier and Snowball?

Glacier: Archival storage.

Snowball: Physical data transfer device for bulk data to/from AWS.

What is Auto scaling?
Automatically increases/decreases EC2 instances based on load or schedule.

Global Infrastructure & Monitoring
What is Region & Availability Zone?

Region: Geographic area (e.g., ap-south-1)

AZ: Isolated data centers within a region.

What is CloudWatch?
Monitoring and observability service for logs, metrics, and alarms.

Difference between NACL and Security Group?

NACL: Stateless, applies to subnet.

Security Group: Stateful, applies to instance.

S3 lifecycle?
Rules to transition data between storage classes or delete after a set time.

Static or Elastic IP?
Static IP address allocated to your account; Elastic IPs can be attached to EC2 instances.

Access & Identity
How to connect to Windows instances?
RDP with username/password decrypted using .pem file.

Difference between EBS, S3, and EFS?

EBS: Block storage for EC2

S3: Object storage

EFS: Shared file storage

If you lost the .pem file then how will you connect to EC2?
Stop instance → Detach volume → Attach to another EC2 → Add new key → Reattach.

What is IAM?
Identity and Access Management – manage users, roles, permissions.

How to attach policy for IAM users?
Via Groups (recommended) or directly to users.

Types of Load Balancers?

ALB (Application)

NLB (Network)

CLB (Classic – legacy)

Can ELB route across regions?
No. Use Route53 + Global Accelerator to route between regions.

Advanced & Serverless
Types of EBS volumes?

gp3, gp2 (General Purpose SSD)

io1, io2 (Provisioned IOPS SSD)

st1 (Throughput HDD)

sc1 (Cold HDD)

What is Elastic Beanstalk?
PaaS to deploy/manage apps (Java, Python, etc.) with minimal infrastructure handling.

What is VPC peering and how to do it?
Connect two VPCs privately. Create peering connection → Accept → Add route.

What is Serverless Computing in AWS?
Run code without managing servers (e.g., AWS Lambda + API Gateway).

Protocols Elastic Load Balancer supports?
HTTP, HTTPS, TCP, TLS, UDP (depends on ALB/NLB type).

Databases & Developer Tools
What is RDS in AWS?
Managed relational database service (e.g., MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle).

What is DynamoDB and When to use it?
Managed NoSQL DB for high-scale apps needing millisecond latency.

Protocols and Port Numbers?

HTTP: 80

HTTPS: 443

SSH: 22

RDP: 3389

MySQL: 3306

PostgreSQL: 5432

What is Pre-Signed URL in S3?
A URL that grants temporary access to a private object.

How to work with Docker Containers in AWS?
Use ECS, Fargate, or EKS for containerized workloads.

Miscellaneous
How many AWS regions available in India?
Currently 3:

ap-south-1 (Mumbai)

ap-south-2 (Hyderabad)

ap-south-3 (Pune)

How to install Java in EC2 machine?

bash
Copy
Edit
sudo yum install java-1.8.0-openjdk
What is Key Pair in AWS?
SSH credentials for logging into EC2 securely.

How to connect with EC2 using Putty?
Convert .pem to .ppk using PuTTYgen, then connect via PuTTY.

How many buckets in S3 by default?
100 per AWS account (can be increased via request).

What is SNS and how to use it?
Simple Notification Service – publish-subscribe messaging (email, SMS, Lambda).

Difference between Horizontal and Vertical Scaling?

Horizontal: Add more instances.

Vertical: Increase instance size/resources.

DB Engines supported by RDS?
MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, MariaDB, Amazon Aurora.

Root user vs IAM user?

Root: Full control, use only for setup.

IAM: Controlled access, use for daily ops.

Why create groups in IAM?
Easier permission management across multiple users.

